<h2>Status Report</h2>


After some thought and discussion, we landed on a specific goal and associated research questions for this project. Our two areas of interest are weather and baseball, and we aim to find something in the intersection of these two to find meaningful conclusions. We know that weather plays a huge role, especially in baseball. Wind and temperature specifically can have a huge impact on batting. To make a meaningful and exciting analysis, we have formulated an overarching research question based on this foundation.

Research question: Our ultimate research question is this; should managers, pitchers, and batters make adjustments to their play based on the day’s weather, or is its effect not significant enough to matter?

Now that we have identified the research question, we have to find a way to realize this goal. To add a personal touch to this exploration, while still remaining relevant, we have decided that as initial proof of concept we will narrow down our analysis to one specific area: Wrigley Field, Chicago. Using Wrigley Field home run data and weather data for Chicago, we aim to find whether or not there is some type of significant impact weather has on batting performance. After doing initial exploration we landed on two datasets, Chicago weather data and Wrigley Field home run data. The weather data includes information about daily average wind speed, direction, and temperature. Our Wrigley Field data includes information on home runs in Wrigley Field including details such as exit velocity and launch angle. Additionally, we will also use a dataset that has more player specific details to ultimately attach more information about each player who hits a home run in our analysis. Our first task is now complete. 

Our next task was mainly focused on the actual acquisition of the data. Before actually acquiring our data, we needed to look more closely at how/to what extent/with what limitations we can use the data. Our weather data comes from NOAA, a federal agency. Generally speaking, unless stated otherwise, data in this case will be free to use and have no real restrictions under a Creative Commons CC0 or CC BY 4.0 license. However, we do want to provide a citation according to NOAA’s guidelines and make sure we are not claiming the data is our own, claim we are endorsed by NOAA, alter the data and present it as governmental material, etc. For our Wrigley Field data, the restrictions are a bit more strict. While there is no official license provided, because of our usage of the data for educational purposes (along with other factors such as our limited use of the data, no monetization, etc.) we are more than likely within our bounds to use the data in the capacity needed for this project. Our player specific dataset (Baseball-Reference.com) has some general restrictions, but leaves us a lot of wiggle room. While unless stated otherwise, SRL owns or licenses the data on the site, we are free to share, use, modify, repackage, or publish data found on the website, but we should give credit to the source to the maximum extent possible, refrain from using automated means to access data (scraping, etc.), create any database/website/application that would act as a rival, or use data to train AI models. Now that we identified what our legal boundaries are, we looked more closely at acquiring our data and the means to do that. For both of our baseball related datasets (Wrigley Field and player specific) we can just do a simple CSV download that is provided as a function on each respective website. Our NOAA data, however, comes in a bit of a stranger format in a .avg file. Luckily, after looking at the file in a text editor, we were able to come up with some Python code to read in the file easily, which is included in our notebook. This task is now done.

After importing our data, we worked on ensuring a reproducible workflow. All data sources were given in the notebook, and anyone that downloads all files from our git repository will be able to reproduce the exact same results we did. After filtering out unnecessary columns, we provided full data dictionaries for each of our three datasets, explaining what every variable included represents. Next, now that we have imported all the data and done some very basic cleaning, we aim to further inspect and clean our data to get it in a form that we feel is the most comfortable to work with and best for the intentions of this project. This means we’ll be looking for structural issues, semantic issues, syntax errors, strange looking data, etc. We checked for missing values, both implicit and explicit, and found a significant amount. However, given the nature of our problem, these should not be an issue. Every missing value was either for a batter that didn’t have a home run in Wrigley Field anyway, or for a day in the weather dataset where no baseball was played. In both of these cases, the rows would have been dropped. As we delve further into our project, we will likely look at additional cleaning, but our initial work was aimed at identifying potential issues. 

In terms of integrity, there was not a lot of work to be done. The process of acquiring the data from each of these sources was quite straightforward and simple and each source is extremely reputable. Currently, we have not taken steps for checksums or anything of that nature, because we did not deem it necessary. However, we are going to continue to take steps to make sure that our data is accurate. We have inspected each dataset and looked for outliers, missing values, schema issues, etc. and ensured that the download of the data was smooth. We have also taken steps to ensure that we are documenting this process, along with the rest of our work, to ensure reproducibility and transparency. 

After these steps, we will be looking to finalize most of the preprocessing work and move towards analysis. Next we will finalize our cleaning and store a version of our cleaned datasets for use. After this, we will look closer at integrating our three datasets, and finally, doing analysis to provide meaningful insights, graphics, etc. 


